Declarative vs. imperative programming
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] One of the first things you'll want to understand about functional programming is that it's a declarative style of programming as opposed to things like object or in a programming and procedural programming which are imperative styles of programming. What this means is that functional programming puts more focus on what things are as opposed to how to get them. A simple example of this would be if we were to talk about houses. If we wanted to describe a house in a declarative way, if we wanted to describe what a house is, we might say that a house is a foundation, four walls and a roof on top. On the other hand, if we were describing a house in an imperative way, if we wanted to describe how to make a house, we might say "In order to make a house, "you need to pour the foundation, build four walls "and then put a roof on top." Let's expand on this a bit and look at a more programming related example. Let's say that we want to write a program that tells us the average of an array of numbers. Imperative programming would specify the steps required to calculate the result. Something like this. First we set x equal to zero. Second, we add the first number in the array to x and then we repeat step two for the rest of the numbers in the array and finally, we divide x by the length of the array. Now, unless you've worked with functional programming before this is is probably how you're used to writing programs thinking of how to get the result. On the other hand, if we wanted to solve the same problem in a declarative way, we could simply say that x is the sum of all the numbers in the array divided by the length of the array. Or if you're more mathematically inclined, we could rewrite it using mathematical notation like this. Now, if it never occurred to your that it's possible to write programs in this way, by simply stating what something is, you're not alone. YOu've probably noticed that talking about things declaratively, talking about what they are instead of how to get them, feels a lot more natural and well frankly, it's a lot easier for many problems. This way of talking about things may also remind some of you of mathematical functions such as these. And as I mentioned before, this is one of the main ideas behind functional programming, to bring the precision of mathematical functions into our programs. As you may have figured, this is also where functional programming gets its name. So it's all very easy to say that functional programming brings the precision of mathematics into programming. But what does that mean exactly? Well, there are three main concepts behind functional programming which allow us to do just that. These concepts are: one, immutability, two, separating functions and data and three, first-class functions. Over the course of the next few videos, I'll go into depth on what each of these concepts means, contrast it with how other paradigms do things and explain its advantages.
