Separation of data and functions
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] The second main concept of functional programming is the separation of data and functions. This is a case where functional programming is directly in contrast with object-oriented programming, where data and functions are almost always grouped together. Let's see what this looks like. First of all for our purposes, let's discuss what data and functions actually are. For our purposes, data might be any values that a program contains, people's names, addresses, and social security numbers in a payroll program, the models, years, and colors of cars on a used car website, the positions, health levels and weapons of characters in a video game, anything. All of this is data. In object-oriented programming, this data is usually wrapped up inside objects as member variables, and the only way we can access it is using an object's methods. In functional programming on the other hand, this data is represented by simple arrays and hashes, or in this case, JavaScript objects. And a function is any operation that we can apply to our data to convert it into useful information. For example, if we want to find the average salary of programmers at our company, find all the cars on our website that were made after a certain year, or find if two characters are colliding in our video game. In object-oriented programming, functions are wrapped up inside objects along with the data that they operate on, and allow us to access or make changes to that data. In functional programming on the other hand, functions are completely separate entities from the data that they operate on. In order to operate on given data, the data must be passed as arguments to the function instead of using the this keyword as in object-oriented programming. And because of the rule of immutability, they should never make changes to any of the data they touch. They only return a modified copy of that data.
