Object oriented to functional approach
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] If you're coming from an object-oriented background, it may seem strange to you that functional programming places an emphasis on keeping data and functions separate, since one of the central concepts of object-oriented programming is that we put data and the functions related to that data together in objects. To understand why it makes sense to keep data and functions separate in functional programming, it might be helpful to think about why we keep them together in object-oriented programming in the first place. The main reason that it's useful to keep data and functions together in the same object is that this allows us to interact with the member variables of an object without touching them directly. What's wrong with touching variables directly? Well, if we give programmers direct access to variables, they can, and in my experience will, change them in ways that they're not supposed to. Consider the simple case of a Person object with publicly accessible properties firstName, lastName, and initials. Now, if we allow programmers to change these properties directly, they have to remember to reset initials every time they change either firstName or lastName, which they're almost certain to forget somewhere, which introduces bugs in the program. The most popular solution to this is to make the variables private, which in JavaScript is usually done by just adding an underscore before the variable name and telling developers not to touch it, and then we allow programmers access to the variables only through functions, which makes sure that the variables are kept up-to-date. In functional programming, however, we don't need to worry about making all our data private because programmers can't alter the data in unwanted ways. Because of the rule of immutability, which we discussed in the previous video, the data remains a constant source of truth. Note that in JavaScript we need a little extra help to keep developers from modifying our object properties, but we'll talk about that in a coming video. If we want to transform the data in some way, 
