First-class functions
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] The third major concept of functional programming is something called first-class functions. This is where things really start to get interesting and where the power and flexibility of functional programming really starts to shine through. So what exactly do we mean when we talk about first-class functions? Well, in object-oriented programming, we generally treat data and functions as different types of entities. We would probably never think of, for example, creating an array of functions or passing functions as arguments to other functions, or even stranger, returning functions from other functions. However, in functional programming, it's not only possible to do these things, it's in fact a source of tremendous flexibility. This is exactly what we mean when we say that a language supports first-class functions. It allows us to treat functions in a very similar way to how we normally treat other values such as numbers, strings, and objects. But hold on a minute. Doesn't this go against what I said in the previous video about the separation of data and functions in functional programming? Well at first glance, it might seem like it, so let me clarify. In object-oriented programming, since functions and data are both defined within the same class, they tend to be tightly coupled. In other words, the functions inside a given class usually reference the data that they operate on directly, as is the case here with this.name. In other words, you generally can't take a given function and remove it from the class it's in and still have it work on its own. In functional programming on the other hand, we designed our functions specifically so that they work in isolation. All of the data that a function needs to operate on is passed in through the arguments, and the only thing that will change the output of the function is a change in the arguments. In other words, functions aren't influenced by any kind of internal or external state. There's a name for this kind of function. We call them pure functions, and in functional programming, we try our best to make every single one of our functions pure. And this is what we mean when we say that we want to keep data and functions separate. Now you might be wondering why we'd want to do stuff like this. What could we possibly gain from doing weird things like having arrays of functions or passing functions as arguments? In fact, this simple change in mindset toward functions opens up a world of possibilities in terms of software design. It gives a lot of flexibility and greatly increases our opportunities for code re-use. It also allows us to do useful things like combine existing functions to create new functions. We'll see in the next chapter how this is done and what its implications are for our programs.
